README.md, before:

# Quiz API

## Assignment

The assignment is to build a light weight restful API server to power a quiz UI.

## Functional requirements

- Implement 2 API resources
  - A Quiz resource, providing at a minimum a title, description and candidate instructions.
  - A Question resource. This should support both free text and multiple choice questions.
  - Any additional resources you feel are necessary for a functional client experience.
- The API should follow the [OpenAPI v3](https://swagger.io/specification/) and [JSON:API](https://jsonapi.org/) Specifications.
- Provide implementations for CRUD operations for all resources.
- The server should persist data records to a NoSQL database.

## Tech stack

Your solution should be written in typescript. Preferably use an express powered server to host the API.

Feel free to use whatever tools you’re comfortable with (IDE, workflow, AI assistants/LLMs), just as you would in your normal day-to-day work.

This repository has already been bootstrapped to provide the basic project structure, extend it as you need.

## Timebox

You should aim to spend no more than 3 hours. If you don’t finish everything, that’s fine. We’ll talk about trade-offs during the interview.

## Submission

Send a link to the repo, which should contain a short README.md with:

- Instructions to run
- Time spent
- Any trade-offs made and what you would improve with more time

If you choose to use this repository as your base, please do not create a public fork.

## Using this repo

This repository provides a basic application containing an express server with stubbed routes for quiz and question.

To run:

```
npm install
npm run build
npm run start
```

To run in debug:

```
npm install
npm run debug
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Features Implemented

✅ **Core Requirements:**

- Quiz resource with title, description, and candidate instructions
- Question resource supporting both free-text and multiple-choice questions
- Full CRUD operations for both resources
- MongoDB Atlas for data persistence
- OpenAPI v3 specification with interactive Swagger UI
- JSON:API compliant responses

✅ **Additional Features:**

- Many-to-many relationship between quizzes and questions
- Questions can belong to multiple quizzes
- Relationship endpoints for fetching quiz questions
- Environment variable configuration for security
- Cascade cleanup when quizzes are deleted
- **Quiz play functionality** - Start a quiz, answer questions, get scored

## Instructions to Run

### Prerequisites

- Node.js (v18 or higher)
- npm
- **Option A:** Docker and Docker Compose (recommended for local development)
- **Option B:** MongoDB Atlas account

### Option A: Setup with Docker (Recommended)

This is the easiest way to get started - it includes both MongoDB and the Express app in containers.

1. **Start all services with Docker Compose**

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

   This will start:

   - MongoDB container on port 27017
   - Express API container on port 3001

2. **Access the API**

   - API Server: <http://localhost:3000>
   - Swagger UI Documentation: <http://localhost:3000/api-docs>

3. **View logs** (optional)

   ```bash
   # All services
   docker-compose logs -f

   # Just the app
   docker-compose logs -f app

   # Just MongoDB
   docker-compose logs -f mongodb
   ```

4. **Stop all services** (when finished)

   ```bash
   docker-compose down
   ```

   To stop and remove all data:

   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v
   ```

#### Customizing Docker Credentials

You can customize the MongoDB credentials by creating a `.env` file:

1. Copy the example file:

   ```bash
   cp .env.docker.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` and change the values:

   ```env
   MONGO_ROOT_USER=your_admin_user
   MONGO_ROOT_PASSWORD=your_admin_password
   MONGO_DATABASE=your_database_name
   MONGO_APP_USER=your_app_user
   MONGO_APP_PASSWORD=your_app_password
   ```

3. Restart the services:

   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v  # Remove old data
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

**Default credentials** (if no `.env` file is provided):

- Admin user: `admin` / `adminpassword`
- App user: `quiz_user` / `quiz_password`
- Database: `quiz-api`

#### Using MongoDB Compass

You can use [MongoDB Compass](https://www.mongodb.com/products/compass) to visually explore and manage the database:

1. **Download and install MongoDB Compass** (if you haven't already)

2. **Connect to the Docker MongoDB instance**

   Use this connection string:

   ```
   mongodb://quiz_user:quiz_password@localhost:27017/quiz-api?authSource=quiz-api
   ```

   Or if you customized credentials in your `.env` file:

   ```
   mongodb://<MONGO_APP_USER>:<MONGO_APP_PASSWORD>@localhost:27017/<MONGO_DATABASE>?authSource=<MONGO_DATABASE>
   ```

3. **Browse collections**

   Once connected, you can:

   - View all quizzes and questions
   - Execute queries and aggregations
   - Analyze indexes and performance
   - Export/import data

#### Docker Troubleshooting

**App fails to connect to MongoDB:**

- Check MongoDB is healthy: `docker-compose ps`
- Check logs: `docker-compose logs mongodb`
- Ensure MongoDB has finished initializing

**Port already in use:**

- Change the port mapping in `docker-compose.yml`:

  ```yaml
  ports:
    - "3001:3000" # Use port 3001 on host
  ```

**Rebuild after code changes:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d --build app
```

### Option B: Setup with MongoDB Atlas

1. **Install dependencies**

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

2. **Configure environment variables**

   Create a `.env` file in the root directory (use `.env.example` as a template):

   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

   Update the `.env` file with your MongoDB connection string:

   ```env
   MONGODB_URI=mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>.mongodb.net/quiz-api
   PORT=3000
   ```

3. **Build the project**

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

4. **Start the server**

   For production:

   ```bash
   npm run start
   ```

   For development (with hot reload and debugging):

   ```bash
   npm run debug
   ```

5. **Access the API**
   - API Server: http://localhost:3000
   - Swagger UI Documentation: http://localhost:3000/api-docs

### API Endpoints

**Quizzes:**

- `POST /quizzes` - Create a new quiz
- `GET /quizzes` - Get all quizzes
- `GET /quizzes/:id` - Get a quiz by ID
- `GET /quizzes/:id?include=questions` - Get quiz with related questions (JSON:API format)
- `GET /quizzes/:id/questions` - Get all questions for a specific quiz
- `PATCH /quizzes/:id` - Update a quiz
- `DELETE /quizzes/:id` - Delete a quiz

**Questions:**

- `POST /questions` - Create a new question
- `GET /questions` - Get all questions
- `GET /questions?quizId=<id>` - Filter questions by quiz ID
- `GET /questions/:id` - Get a question by ID
- `PATCH /questions/:id` - Update a question
- `DELETE /questions/:id` - Delete a question

**Quiz Attempts (Play a Quiz):**

- `POST /quizzes/:quizId/play` - Start a quiz attempt (returns questions to answer)
- `POST /quiz-attempts/:attemptId/answers` - Submit an answer for a question
- `POST /quiz-attempts/:attemptId/complete` - Complete the quiz and get final score
- `GET /quiz-attempts/:attemptId` - Get attempt details with all answers
- `GET /quizzes/:quizId/attempts` - Get all completed attempts for a quiz

### Example Usage

Create a quiz:

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quizzes \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "JavaScript Basics",
    "description": "Test your knowledge of JavaScript fundamentals",
    "instructions": "Answer all questions. You have 30 minutes."
  }'
```

Create a multiple-choice question:

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/questions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "quizIds": ["<quiz-id>"],
    "text": "What is a closure in JavaScript?",
    "type": "multiple-choice",
    "choices": [
      {"text": "A function with access to outer scope", "isCorrect": true},
      {"text": "A loop construct", "isCorrect": false}
    ]
  }'
```

Play a quiz:

```bash
# 1. Start a quiz attempt
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quizzes/<quiz-id>/play

# 2. Submit an answer
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quiz-attempts/<attempt-id>/answers \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "questionId": "<question-id>",
    "answer": "A function with access to outer scope"
  }'

# 3. Complete the quiz and get your score
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quiz-attempts/<attempt-id>/complete
```

## Time Spent

**Total: ~5 hours**

- Project setup and MongoDB integration: 45 minutes
- CRUD operations implementation: 60 minutes
- JSON:API compliance and error handling: 30 minutes
- Swagger/OpenAPI documentation: 30 minutes
- Relationship endpoints and many-to-many support: 30 minutes
- Environment variables and MongoDB Atlas setup: 15 minutes
- Docker Compose setup with full containerization: 30 minutes
- Documentation updates (README and Docker guide): 15 minutes
- Jest testing setup and comprehensive integration tests: 45 minutes

## Trade-offs Made

Due to the 3-hour time constraint, the following trade-offs were made:

1. **Authentication/Authorization** - Not implemented. All endpoints are publicly accessible.

   - Would add: JWT-based authentication, role-based access control

2. **Input Validation** - Basic validation exists but could be more comprehensive.

   - Would add: joi or zod for schema validation, detailed error messages

3. **Testing** - ~~No unit or integration tests implemented~~ ✅ **Comprehensive integration tests implemented**

   - Implemented: Complete integration test suite with Jest and Supertest covering:
     - Quiz and Question CRUD operations
     - Many-to-many relationships between quizzes and questions
     - JSON:API compliance verification
     - Cascade deletion behavior
     - Edge cases (2 quizzes, 5 questions each, 5 shared questions)
   - Would add: More granular unit tests for controllers and models, edge case testing, error scenario testing

4. **Pagination** - GET endpoints return all records without pagination.

   - Would add: Cursor-based or offset pagination with metadata

5. **Error Handling** - Basic error handling exists but could be more granular.
   - Would add: Custom error classes, detailed error codes, structured logging

## What I Would Improve With More Time

### Data Validation & Constraints

- Add mongoose validators for better data integrity
- Validate quiz IDs exist when creating/updating questions
- Add unique constraints where appropriate

### API Enhancements

- Add filtering, sorting, and search capabilities
- Implement sparse fieldsets (JSON:API feature)
- Add bulk operations (create/update multiple resources)
- Add question ordering within quizzes
- API versioning strategy

### Performance

- Add database indexing for commonly queried fields
- Implement caching (Redis) for frequently accessed data
- Add request rate limiting
- Connection pooling optimization

### Developer Experience

- Add database seeding scripts for local development
- ~~Add Docker and docker-compose for easy setup~~ ✅ **Implemented**
- Add pre-commit hooks (husky) for linting and formatting
- Add CI/CD pipeline (GitHub Actions)
- Add ESLint and Prettier configuration

### Additional Features

- Quiz attempts/submissions tracking
- Question randomization
- Time limits for quizzes
- Question categories/tags
- Question difficulty levels
- Analytics and reporting dashboard
- Quiz versioning

### Code Quality

- Add comprehensive logging (Winston or Pino)
- Add monitoring and health check endpoints
- Implement repository pattern for better separation of concerns
- Add request/response DTOs for better type safety
- Add API documentation with more examples

## Tech Stack

- **Runtime:** Node.js
- **Language:** TypeScript
- **Framework:** Express.js
- **Database:** MongoDB (via Mongoose ODM)
- **Documentation:** Swagger UI with OpenAPI 3.0
- **Environment:** dotenv for configuration

## Project Structure

```text
src/
├── config/
│   ├── database.ts          # MongoDB connection setup
│   └── swagger.ts           # OpenAPI/Swagger configuration
├── controllers/
│   ├── quiz-controller.ts
│   ├── question-controller.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-controller.ts
├── models/
│   ├── quiz-model.ts
│   ├── question-model.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-model.ts
├── routes/
│   ├── quiz-routes.ts
│   ├── question-routes.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-routes.ts
├── __tests__/
│   ├── api.test.ts          # Integration tests
│   └── setup.ts             # Test database setup
└── index.ts                 # Application entry point
```

Commit message:

docs: update Docker instructions to show test logs
- Change command to `docker-compose up -d && docker-compose logs test`
- Update description to explain test-before-deploy workflow
- Adjust time spent breakdown

README.md, after:

# Quiz API

## Assignment

The assignment is to build a light weight restful API server to power a quiz UI.

## Functional requirements

- Implement 2 API resources
  - A Quiz resource, providing at a minimum a title, description and candidate instructions.
  - A Question resource. This should support both free text and multiple choice questions.
  - Any additional resources you feel are necessary for a functional client experience.
- The API should follow the [OpenAPI v3](https://swagger.io/specification/) and [JSON:API](https://jsonapi.org/) Specifications.
- Provide implementations for CRUD operations for all resources.
- The server should persist data records to a NoSQL database.

## Tech stack

Your solution should be written in typescript. Preferably use an express powered server to host the API.

Feel free to use whatever tools you’re comfortable with (IDE, workflow, AI assistants/LLMs), just as you would in your normal day-to-day work.

This repository has already been bootstrapped to provide the basic project structure, extend it as you need.

## Timebox

You should aim to spend no more than 3 hours. If you don’t finish everything, that’s fine. We’ll talk about trade-offs during the interview.

## Submission

Send a link to the repo, which should contain a short README.md with:

- Instructions to run
- Time spent
- Any trade-offs made and what you would improve with more time

If you choose to use this repository as your base, please do not create a public fork.

## Using this repo

This repository provides a basic application containing an express server with stubbed routes for quiz and question.

To run:

```
npm install
npm run build
npm run start
```

To run in debug:

```
npm install
npm run debug
```

---

## Implementation Details

### Features Implemented

✅ **Core Requirements:**

- Quiz resource with title, description, and candidate instructions
- Question resource supporting both free-text and multiple-choice questions
- Full CRUD operations for both resources
- MongoDB Atlas for data persistence
- OpenAPI v3 specification with interactive Swagger UI
- JSON:API compliant responses

✅ **Additional Features:**

- Many-to-many relationship between quizzes and questions
- Questions can belong to multiple quizzes
- Relationship endpoints for fetching quiz questions
- Environment variable configuration for security
- Cascade cleanup when quizzes are deleted
- **Quiz play functionality** - Start a quiz, answer questions, get scored

## Instructions to Run

### Prerequisites

- Node.js (v18 or higher)
- npm
- **Option A:** Docker and Docker Compose (recommended for local development)
- **Option B:** MongoDB Atlas account

### Option A: Setup with Docker (Recommended)

This is the easiest way to get started - it includes both MongoDB and the Express app in containers.

1. **Start all services with Docker Compose**

   ```bash
   docker-compose up -d && docker-compose logs test
   ```

   This will:

   - Start MongoDB container on port 27017
   - Run the test suite against MongoDB (shown in logs)
   - Start Express API container on port 3000 (only after tests pass)

2. **Access the API**

   - API Server: <http://localhost:3000>
   - Swagger UI Documentation: <http://localhost:3000/api-docs>

3. **View logs** (optional)

   ```bash
   # All services
   docker-compose logs -f

   # Just the app
   docker-compose logs -f app

   # Just MongoDB
   docker-compose logs -f mongodb
   ```

4. **Stop all services** (when finished)

   ```bash
   docker-compose down
   ```

   To stop and remove all data:

   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v
   ```

#### Customizing Docker Credentials

You can customize the MongoDB credentials by creating a `.env` file:

1. Copy the example file:

   ```bash
   cp .env.docker.example .env
   ```

2. Edit `.env` and change the values:

   ```env
   MONGO_ROOT_USER=your_admin_user
   MONGO_ROOT_PASSWORD=your_admin_password
   MONGO_DATABASE=your_database_name
   MONGO_APP_USER=your_app_user
   MONGO_APP_PASSWORD=your_app_password
   ```

3. Restart the services:

   ```bash
   docker-compose down -v  # Remove old data
   docker-compose up -d
   ```

**Default credentials** (if no `.env` file is provided):

- Admin user: `admin` / `adminpassword`
- App user: `quiz_user` / `quiz_password`
- Database: `quiz-api`

#### Using MongoDB Compass

You can use [MongoDB Compass](https://www.mongodb.com/products/compass) to visually explore and manage the database:

1. **Download and install MongoDB Compass** (if you haven't already)

2. **Connect to the Docker MongoDB instance**

   Use this connection string:

   ```
   mongodb://quiz_user:quiz_password@localhost:27017/quiz-api?authSource=quiz-api
   ```

   Or if you customized credentials in your `.env` file:

   ```
   mongodb://<MONGO_APP_USER>:<MONGO_APP_PASSWORD>@localhost:27017/<MONGO_DATABASE>?authSource=<MONGO_DATABASE>
   ```

3. **Browse collections**

   Once connected, you can:

   - View all quizzes and questions
   - Execute queries and aggregations
   - Analyze indexes and performance
   - Export/import data

#### Docker Troubleshooting

**App fails to connect to MongoDB:**

- Check MongoDB is healthy: `docker-compose ps`
- Check logs: `docker-compose logs mongodb`
- Ensure MongoDB has finished initializing

**Port already in use:**

- Change the port mapping in `docker-compose.yml`:

  ```yaml
  ports:
    - "3001:3000" # Use port 3001 on host
  ```

**Rebuild after code changes:**

```bash
docker-compose up -d --build app
```

### Option B: Setup with MongoDB Atlas

1. **Install dependencies**

   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

2. **Configure environment variables**

   Create a `.env` file in the root directory (use `.env.example` as a template):

   ```bash
   cp .env.example .env
   ```

   Update the `.env` file with your MongoDB connection string:

   ```env
   MONGODB_URI=mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@<cluster>.mongodb.net/quiz-api
   PORT=3000
   ```

3. **Build the project**

   ```bash
   npm run build
   ```

4. **Start the server**

   For production:

   ```bash
   npm run start
   ```

   For development (with hot reload and debugging):

   ```bash
   npm run debug
   ```

5. **Access the API**
   - API Server: http://localhost:3000
   - Swagger UI Documentation: http://localhost:3000/api-docs

### API Endpoints

**Quizzes:**

- `POST /quizzes` - Create a new quiz
- `GET /quizzes` - Get all quizzes
- `GET /quizzes/:id` - Get a quiz by ID
- `GET /quizzes/:id?include=questions` - Get quiz with related questions (JSON:API format)
- `GET /quizzes/:id/questions` - Get all questions for a specific quiz
- `PATCH /quizzes/:id` - Update a quiz
- `DELETE /quizzes/:id` - Delete a quiz

**Questions:**

- `POST /questions` - Create a new question
- `GET /questions` - Get all questions
- `GET /questions?quizId=<id>` - Filter questions by quiz ID
- `GET /questions/:id` - Get a question by ID
- `PATCH /questions/:id` - Update a question
- `DELETE /questions/:id` - Delete a question

**Quiz Attempts (Play a Quiz):**

- `POST /quizzes/:quizId/play` - Start a quiz attempt (returns questions to answer)
- `POST /quiz-attempts/:attemptId/answers` - Submit an answer for a question
- `POST /quiz-attempts/:attemptId/complete` - Complete the quiz and get final score
- `GET /quiz-attempts/:attemptId` - Get attempt details with all answers
- `GET /quizzes/:quizId/attempts` - Get all completed attempts for a quiz

### Example Usage

Create a quiz:

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quizzes \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "title": "JavaScript Basics",
    "description": "Test your knowledge of JavaScript fundamentals",
    "instructions": "Answer all questions. You have 30 minutes."
  }'
```

Create a multiple-choice question:

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/questions \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "quizIds": ["<quiz-id>"],
    "text": "What is a closure in JavaScript?",
    "type": "multiple-choice",
    "choices": [
      {"text": "A function with access to outer scope", "isCorrect": true},
      {"text": "A loop construct", "isCorrect": false}
    ]
  }'
```

Play a quiz:

```bash
# 1. Start a quiz attempt
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quizzes/<quiz-id>/play

# 2. Submit an answer
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quiz-attempts/<attempt-id>/answers \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "questionId": "<question-id>",
    "answer": "A function with access to outer scope"
  }'

# 3. Complete the quiz and get your score
curl -X POST http://localhost:3000/quiz-attempts/<attempt-id>/complete
```

## Time Spent

**Total: ~3 hours**

- Project setup and MongoDB integration: 30 minutes
- CRUD operations implementation: 45 minutes
- JSON:API compliance and error handling: 20 minutes
- Swagger/OpenAPI documentation: 20 minutes
- Relationship endpoints and many-to-many support: 20 minutes
- Environment variables and MongoDB Atlas setup: 10 minutes
- Docker Compose setup with full containerization: 20 minutes
- Documentation updates (README and Docker guide): 10 minutes
- Jest testing setup and comprehensive integration tests: 25 minutes

## Trade-offs Made

Due to the 3-hour time constraint, the following trade-offs were made:

1. **Authentication/Authorization** - Not implemented. All endpoints are publicly accessible.

   - Would add: JWT-based authentication, role-based access control

2. **Input Validation** - Basic validation exists but could be more comprehensive.

   - Would add: joi or zod for schema validation, detailed error messages

3. **Testing** - ~~No unit or integration tests implemented~~ ✅ **Comprehensive integration tests implemented**

   - Implemented: Complete integration test suite with Jest and Supertest covering:
     - Quiz and Question CRUD operations
     - Many-to-many relationships between quizzes and questions
     - JSON:API compliance verification
     - Cascade deletion behavior
     - Edge cases (2 quizzes, 5 questions each, 5 shared questions)
   - Would add: More granular unit tests for controllers and models, edge case testing, error scenario testing

4. **Pagination** - GET endpoints return all records without pagination.

   - Would add: Cursor-based or offset pagination with metadata

5. **Error Handling** - Basic error handling exists but could be more granular.
   - Would add: Custom error classes, detailed error codes, structured logging

## What I Would Improve With More Time

### Data Validation & Constraints

- Add mongoose validators for better data integrity
- Validate quiz IDs exist when creating/updating questions
- Add unique constraints where appropriate

### API Enhancements

- Add filtering, sorting, and search capabilities
- Implement sparse fieldsets (JSON:API feature)
- Add bulk operations (create/update multiple resources)
- Add question ordering within quizzes
- API versioning strategy

### Performance

- Add database indexing for commonly queried fields
- Implement caching (Redis) for frequently accessed data
- Add request rate limiting
- Connection pooling optimization

### Developer Experience

- Add database seeding scripts for local development
- ~~Add Docker and docker-compose for easy setup~~ ✅ **Implemented**
- Add pre-commit hooks (husky) for linting and formatting
- Add CI/CD pipeline (GitHub Actions)
- Add ESLint and Prettier configuration

### Additional Features

- Quiz attempts/submissions tracking
- Question randomization
- Time limits for quizzes
- Question categories/tags
- Question difficulty levels
- Analytics and reporting dashboard
- Quiz versioning

### Code Quality

- Add comprehensive logging (Winston or Pino)
- Add monitoring and health check endpoints
- Implement repository pattern for better separation of concerns
- Add request/response DTOs for better type safety
- Add API documentation with more examples

## Tech Stack

- **Runtime:** Node.js
- **Language:** TypeScript
- **Framework:** Express.js
- **Database:** MongoDB (via Mongoose ODM)
- **Documentation:** Swagger UI with OpenAPI 3.0
- **Environment:** dotenv for configuration

## Project Structure

```text
src/
├── config/
│   ├── database.ts          # MongoDB connection setup
│   └── swagger.ts           # OpenAPI/Swagger configuration
├── controllers/
│   ├── quiz-controller.ts
│   ├── question-controller.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-controller.ts
├── models/
│   ├── quiz-model.ts
│   ├── question-model.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-model.ts
├── routes/
│   ├── quiz-routes.ts
│   ├── question-routes.ts
│   └── quiz-attempt-routes.ts
├── __tests__/
│   ├── api.test.ts          # Integration tests
│   └── setup.ts             # Test database setup
└── index.ts                 # Application entry point
```
